---
layout: post
title: Volatility-based strategies for retail Part 2 
---
 

In the second part of the series we explain in detail how technical analysis corresponds to various option strategies 


## Background 

Technical Analysis does not work for stocks or equity index now unlike the 1960s. One of the reason is that news impacting stock prices are now priced in quicker than ever with the use of algo trading and so on. Price momentum or trends are often short-lived that technical indicators based on moving averages or alike not longer be useful. It is well-known that trend following strategies has an option like return of a long (lookback) straddle [1]. 


## Definition 

We define Technical Analysis Trend Following as systmatic trading rules based on price action only such as MACD or Channel Breakout. Most of them can be conidered as having a systematic entry and exit rule based on recent prices. Turtle trading system is the most famous example of those. This family of trading strategies can be defined by the following parameters

- Entry Condition: Lookback period (T1) and Threshold (P1) such as return_252 > 0.02
- Exit Condition: Lookback period (T2) and Threshold (P2) such as return_21 < 0
- Stop Loss: Maximum risk to take per trade (R) 

Long-term equity anticipation securities (LEAPS) are options contracts with expiration dates that are longer than one year. They can be defined by the following parameters. Here we ignore the difference between European and American Options for simplicity. 

- Maturity of option: 12/18/24 months ahead
- Strike: defined by moneyness of option relative to the spot price at entry, to reduce theta loss, we usually use options with moneyness above 1.25. The strike can be considered as the stop loss for each trade.
- Roll-over frequency: every 6/12 months roll over to the next LEAP option so that options in our portfolio has a long enough expirary 


### Hypothesis 1: 

Under the completeness assumption, any payoff from technical analysis trading rules can be repdocued by a right combination of options. A heuristic rule is that mean-reversion based strategies corresponds to covered-call stratgies and (time-series) momentum strategies corresponds to 

It is better to work in the LEAP options parameters space than the technical analysis spaces for the reasons explained below. 

- Single stocks have large gap up/down risk at open.
- Stocks has a natural upper and lower bound dictated by earnings and valuation metrics. This price levels are reflected in mean-reversion after a stock making ATH and so on. Trend Following ignore these price levels (technical or fundamental) which has empricial significance 
- Turtle trading rules do not provide a good way to take profit on the way up and too late to take profit. 


### Hypothesis 2: 

The BS model of options or other more advanced models provide a wide range of metrics (Option Greeks) which can be mapped to various risk metrics used by trend following technical analysis. 

- Delta of option: how much we need to buy to delta-hedge the option
- Theta of option: whipsaw losses in trend following due to sideways market movement 
- Gamma of option: how sensitive our position towards market condition
- Vega of option: potential benefits from market volatility


Most retail would use technical analysis to manage the drawdown of buy-and hold strategies. Example: Sell when the price falls below 250-day moving average. It is well-known the professionals can achieve the same more effectively through the use of options. Therefore, we propose retail can do the same by pursuing a similar stratgies using LEAP options to reduce drawdown in portfolio. In the case where purchasing LEAP options directly is undesirable, we propose the use of delta-hedging as an apporximation which works well for most practical use for a retail investors. 


## Option Strategies

In this post we explore various option strategies with the assumption of a long-only portfolio (typical requirement for retail investors). Instead of working with actually traded options, we use the theorectical price derived from BS-formula using realised volatility as the input. 

We do not used implied volatility in the replication as we would like to benchmark our strategy with price-based trend following models under the same data constratint. This allows the model to extend to the times when options are not actively traded without using linear regression to impute implied volatilities based on recent price history. Another reason is to reduce dependencies of datasets for retail investors to implement this strategy. 

Advantage of this theorectical approach
- Constant maturity of options, no need to roll over 
- Simplicity of model 
- Flexible strikes 

Disadvantage of this theorectical approach
- The model ignore difference between implied volatility and realised volatility so we can only perform delta/theta trades.
- Option volume and open interests provide useful information to measure level of speculative activities.
- As options strikes are provided in discrete intervals, stock prices tends to stick around these price levels (Max-Pain theory on options)


### LEAP Option strategies (delta-hedge version) 

We implement an LEAP option strategy based on the delta of a call option with rolling strike and constant maturity derived from realised volatility. 

- Rolling Strike: 0.9/1.1/1.3 * average adjusted price of the last 252 trading days
- Constant Maturiy: 2 years
- Realised volatility: Annualised rolling volatility of the last 21 days

The delta calculated from these strategies are then used to rebalance the portfolio every 30 trading days with a t-cost assumption of 0.5% of dollar volume. 


### Covered-call option strategies (delta-hedge version)

We can simulate covered-call strategies (hold the underlying and sell the following call options) by rebalancing our portfolio with 1 - delta of the following call options. 

- Rolling Strike: 1/1.1 * average adjusted price of the last 63 trading days
- Constant Maturiy: 0.5 years
- Realised volatility: Annualised rolling volatility of the last 21 days


### At-the-money option strategies (delta-hedge version)

We can simulate at-the-money option strategies as above using the delta of a call option with rolling strike and constant maturity derived from realised volatility.

- Rolling Strike: current adjusted price
- Constant Maturiy: 1 years
- Realised volatility: Annualised rolling volatility of the last 21 days


### Out-of-the-money option strategies (delta-hedge version)

We can simulate out-of-the-money option strategies  as above using the delta of a call option with rolling strike and constant maturity derived from realised volatility.

- Rolling Strike: 1.2/1.4 * average adjusted price of the last 63 trading days
- Constant Maturiy: 0.5 years
- Realised volatility: Annualised rolling volatility of the last 21 days


## Technical details 
 
Why we can ignore dividends 
- As we are reproducing using the actual underlying, we are following the total return of the stock, the artifical effect of forward/spot differences due to dividends does not apply to us. 

Why use BS formula for European options
- A closed form solution by BS formula is better for retail to implement the daily updates. We recognise BS formula gives a poor estimate for OTM options. 

Reason why not to buy LEAP options directly
- High spread and lack of liquidity. With a commission-free broker such as FreeTrade, it will be easier to do it yourself. For UK investors, it is not possible to have derivatives trade in your ISA. Therefore, reproducing the delta of LEAP options directly can capture the tax advantage.
- There are many rules regarding settlement of options that retail are not familiar with. These operational risks are eliminated by (dynamically) holding the underlying instead

## Future work
- Perform similar analysis using actual options data from WRDS. 


## References 

[1] https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3042173    
[2] https://twitter.com/vol_christopher/status/1352321427920269313      

