---
layout: post
title: Volatility-based strategies for retail Part 1C 
---


# Introduction 

Following previous posts which classify trading strategies into two main class. We provide the philosophical foundations of trend following and (long) volatility, using insights from Taleb and other great authors. The post will also be of interest to readers without prior knowledge in quantitative finance.  


# The origin of market trends 

We provide serveral theories from economics and history for market trend to exist. 

## Behavioural economics

Behavioural economics suggests herding is an integral part of human behaviour. Retail investors, with limited knowledge and experience, will copy behaviour of star investors, such as ARK investment. The slow dissimilation of knowledge from more informed market participants to less informed creates a price trend, even though this trend has diminished given a more level playing ground (zero-commission brokers and auto trade API) are provided for retail. In times where retail participation is high (1998-2000 before dot com bubble, 2005-2007 before GFC, 2018-202X for the everything bubble), we observe trending rather than sideways market. 

The rise of passive investing also creates market trend by providing consistent flows (through regular investment and retirment accounts) and enables big names in index to grow bigger (Example: the top 5 holdings of S&P 500 (2021 June) are simply the Tech giants) as market-cap based index introduces positive feedback to the stock price.  As the weighting of a stock in the index increase, passive fund managers need to buy more of that stock, this pushes up the stock price (and thus market cap) and further increase the weighting of a stock in the index. Therefore, the popularity of index investing enables both the index and leaders in the index to go up consistently regardless of "fundamentals" or "marco" factors. This fact is confimed by the record low or market depth in both S&P 500 and NASDAQ 100 index. 

Herding is not limited to retail investors only, professional investors also engage in herding behaviour due the pressure to outperform a cretain index. As it is standard to measure fund performance against the market index, most fund managers have to copy the stocks with a large weighting within the index to keep up with index. This fact is especially significant for US big tech companies given a vast market cap of these companies and their impact on portfolios. This results in most actively managed equity funds underperform the market after fees, driving more allocators towards passive and smart-beta funds, trigger the above feedback loop. 

Therefore, as long as we have majority of population regularly invest into 60/40 funds regardless of market condition, we will observe a consistent market trend, as the political consequences of allowing retirement savings for most to fail would be unimaginable. This creates the strong moral hazard as rates are kept low to sustain market at historical valuations, which in turn leads to excess speculation, which will be explained below. 

## Leverage

Leverage amphify existing trends by changing the return profile of traders using leverage. The use of leverage, directly or indirectly through options creates a positive reinforcement feedback loop on both the way up and down. The WSB phenomenon is a good example of how it creates the melt-up of market since 2020 June to 2021 May. For the same reason, liquidation of these positions are often brutal. The collapse of Archegos Capital is an example that even professional investors can make terrible decisions, which result in significant drop of stock prices in the liquidated holdings. We comment the fact market carsh often last shorter (weeks-months) than the melt-up process (months-years) due to the assymetrical nature of liquidation. Therefore, leverage allows stock price to deviate from "fair-value" with trends sustained by unrealised profits in the account. 

## Positioning 

Portfolio insurance and other volatility target strategies can exaggerate downward trends. 
Short squeeze can create sustained upward trends. 
Gamma squeeze (in theory) can create both upward and downward trends. 


## Monopoly (Equity)

Monopolies companies leads to significant growth. Tech giants since the dot-com bubble has been on continuous growth. Throughout history and different regions, we have seen companies having monopolistic status lasting for decades. From VOC to Standard Oil, successful companies will grow for decades until the rise of competitors or intervention from government. No matter due to government decree or technology patents, monopoly in key aspects of production allows companies to achieve monopoly status which can last for decades to create market trends.  

Similar effects can be found for holding companies that last for centuries. While these companies might not necessarily outperforming the market, holding US companies that have existed before WWII (from 1970 to 2020) can often outperform holding the top 500 US stocks in 1970 without rebalancing (from 1970 to 2020) given many companies undergone restructuring and bankrupt through different busines cycles. 

Warren Buffet select stocks based on having a moat. 


## Geo-political factors (Cross-Country Momentum)

Ray Dalio in his book [1] has pointed out various factors that determine the success or fail of nations. These cycles are often long-lasting (over decades) which creates the illusion of a trend within a person's lifetime. 

A good example would be the rise of the US since WWII. As the US establishes a worldwide military supremacy, investments flow into the US, creating a positive reinforcement loop that allows the US to achieve domination in global economy and culture. 


## Central Bank policies (Interest Rates)


## Demand and Supply Shocks  (Commodities) 

For Commodities 




# The risk of passive trend following 

Naive trend following strategies that aims to provide downside protection is equivalent to portfolio insurance which would result in 1987 flash crash. As most trade volumes are now driven by HFT and automated algos, it is very likely that we will have a few sudden crashes (10-20%) within a month followed by months of recovery. 

Index investing (Market-cap based) can be consider as a kind of very long term momentum strategy where we follow the growth and decline of individual companies (measured by market-cap). 

As passive investing offers an extremely low cost solution for both retail and pension funds to get requried equity exposure, it becomes harder for quantitative-based momentum strategies to outperform the market as the order flow that momentum strategies relies on all go to index funds. Over-crowding diminishes the alpha of naive trend following strategies so we only get beta or smart-beta factors. Combined with supportive government policies since 2000s, the benefit of reducing market exposure during downturn is limited. 

The lack of diversity in the trading algo ecosystems will leads to boom and bust cycle. Passive investing will consume the market until it stops to reflect the "intrinsic" value of companies or economy. (Example: Meme stocks has increased their weightings in various market index since 2020) While the cause of each financial crisis is different, the common themes involved excess leverage, over-generous monetary policies and overcrowding in strategies or assets. 

The greatest challenge for CTA funds is that the market trends are no longer symmetrical. For medium-term trend following strategies, it under-performed in the fresh crashes of 2018,2020 as there is no second-leg down following these crashes unlike the past. When trend following funds reduces equity exposure after the flash crash, it missed out the swift recovery. This results in under-performance 

Therefore, we need to build better "trend-following" strategies and long volaility overlay hedges. The solution is more than just diversifying time-frames and asset classes. We suggest emerging AI methods such as transfer learning and reinforcement learning with have a great impact on CTA funds. 



# References

[1] Changing World Order: Why Nations Succeed Or Fail. Ray Dalio 





# Introduction 

We explore Kelly style investment strategies, where each trade decision is made with a fixed stop loss and take profit target. We show that this is also equivalent to trend following strategies. 


# Kelly Criterion 

There are different paradigm of trading algorithm. One of them is preditive models, which aims to predict return of an asset for a fixed time period and then use these signals to construct portfolio. The other comes from control theory, which uses reinforcement learning techniques to learn actions which can adpat to different market environemnt. Most of the quantitative trading models belongs to the former group which makes use supervised and unsupervised machine learning techniques. 

We propose a way of backtesting by considering a sequence of Kelly style bets based on the investment horizon of the investor. 

A trading portfolio can be constructed by averaging the bets over the investment horizon. For example, we average the trade decision signal over the last 252 trading days for a portfolio with the aim of 1 year return. 

A major limitation of the Kelly style bets is that it ignores the compounding effect of returns. Unless the investor is making a fixed size bet each time or investing out of regular income, the long term portofolio return will differ depends on the order of effects. This can be shown by considering Monte Carlo simulations of Kelly style bets. Ergodicity in portfolio returns cannot be easily modelled by traditional machine learning models. 

Any trading strategy under Black-Scholes framework is a decision process following the filtration generated by the price process. A very crude assumption is that the price process is Markov, which suggests all the information about the series is contained in the current price. (There are empirical evidence suggesting financial time series are long-memory instead). 


# Predictive models 

Here we propose serveral hypothesis

## Hypothesis 1 

There is an equivalence between technical analysis and traditional time-series models such as ARIMA. As these time-series models have no predictive power in trading since 2010s, applying technical analysis will not make investment decisions better than buy and hold.

## Hypothesis 2 

Previously we have shown the equivalence between trend following and option strategies. We suggest Kelly style trades are also equivalent to trend following due to the nature of drawdown management. 


## Kelly Style bets 


# Limitations

The Kelly table we constructed are based on returns from 1993 only, which do not have a bear market lasting longer than 2 years. The model is not tested on Japanese Equities which experienced drawdowns that do not recover since 1980s. 

## Further work 

Include trend filtering signals in the Kelly style bets. The naive Kelly style model above can be improved by trading only the price is above 252-EMA or using machine learned rules about market regime. 


# Summary

In the last few posts, we have explore the idea that most systematic trends can be considered as volatility trades. Systematic trend following, a famous strategy for both retail and professionals, can be considered as long volatility strategies. We have demonstrated how to create drawdown managed portfolio using option strategies and Kelly style trades and how retail can implement a crude approximation of these strategies trading with the underlying only. 


### Random ideas on Twitter 

Berkson’s paradox. 
There’s a nice example of this in finance: for 13F strategies (copying smart investors) it’s often the “weird” stocks that have the most alpha cos you know the analyst had to bang the table to get them into the book

For entry level people, I like the "construct a binary option from vanillas" question. Taking the infinitesimal limit of spreads is a nice technique that comes up elsewhere (e.g deriving risk neutral pdfs from infinitesimal butterflies)

Broadly, there are 3 types of systematic trading strategy that can "work". 

In order of increasing turnover:
1. Risk premia harvesting
2. Economically-sensible, statistically-quantifiable slow-converging inefficiencies
3. Trading fast-converging supply/demand imbalances


True tail risk hedges are not just short the market locally. They are highly convex -- they aim to protect relatively little against small drawdowns but a whole lot against big ones.

price density and efficiency ratio


Trade set-ups based on both direction and volatility 
https://twitter.com/MichaelGoodwell/status/1428034482381234182/photo/1


Shit to avoid:
- Anything Academic (GARCH, ARIMA, etc)
- Loads of buzzwords, ends up using Linear Regression
- Literally anything that has a YouTube tutorial
- Modelled prices instead of returns (ill personally kill you)
- Pure lies, you will be quizzed on them


