---
layout: post
title: Volatility-based strategies for retail Part 1
---

# Introduction 

This is the first post the series detailing how to build better trading strategies for retail investors under various constraints. The idea is not to build the best strategy that the industry use but to offer simple and robust solutions that outperform buy-and-hold. 

### Typical constraints faced by retail 
- Transaction costs: 0.5% of dollar volume 
- Rebalance frequency: Monthly/Quarterly and during large movement days (will provide a precise definition in later posts)
- Data used: Open Source data detailed in [my other post](https://thomaswong2022.github.io/Data/)
- Instruments: ETFs and stocks (No derivatives)
- Direction: Long only except for shorting index through inverse ETFs

Due to the highly transparent nature of these solutions, financial professionals who cannot freely trade their own account will also find them useful. 

The series will make use of ideas from the latest academic research and industry leaders I follow on twitter. Most of the ideas would be well-known to professionals but I believe some of my friends in the Imperial Algo Trade Soc (www.algosoc.com/) would find it useful.  

The series will be written in the style of mathematical research papers with theorems replaced by hypothesis. Hypothesis here refers to well-established facts that cannot be rigorously proven like mathematical theorems, but has the same importance. Accepting the validity of these hypothesis allow us to proceed building different strategies. 

Disclaimer: The views are my own and do not represent IC Algo Soc. 


## Philosophy 

It is a well-known fact that equity return distribution (for US market over 20 years) has a negative skew with positive mean. Buy-and-hold strategies capture the long-term positive trend while taking the risk of significant drawdowns. This explains the equity risk-premium over government bonds. 

Throughout financial history, we have seen many cases of a hedge fund generating stable returns until it blows up (LTCM) or having years of flat return until a Black Swan event allowing them to score big (The Big Short, Universa Investments). No matter what kind of machine learning systems one employed, a trading system will either generating good returns in stable market conditions until tail risk events occurs (deflationary or inflationary) or under-performing in stable market conditions and score big in Black Swan events (Flash Crash, Stagflation) occurs. This trade-off is the foundation of quantitative finance which stems not only from portfolio return persepctive but also on trading system design and execution which we will explain in detail below. 

Retail investors with limited access to data and infrastrcture mostly relies on price data to market-timing based strategies. Whether in the form of candle-stick charts, elliott wave theory, turtle-trading systems, all these technical indicators failed to perform consistently. At the other extreme would be buy-and-hold and buy-the-dip mentalities advocated by personal finance advisors. While these advices are not inherently wrong, this mentality is due to recency bias pointed out many times by Christopher Cole. Two major recency bias include 
- The implicit guaranetee of FED in supporting the US Credit and Equity market, thus allowing covered-call strategies to outperform buy-and-hold since 2010. 
- The negative correlation between bonds and stocks in the last 10 years, thus allowing a typical 60/40 retirment portfolio to has a smaller drawdown in market downturn might not hold when both bond and equity market are at ATH for valuations. 

A change in marco-economic policy, whether by rising inflation, climate change or geo-political risks will cause many strategies to suffer. This applies for both 60/40 portfolios and sophiscated Machine Learning portfolio by some quantitative hedge funds. 

We suggest retail investors can benefit from trend following strategies in addition to typical portfolio of holding stock index and high-dividend stocks. 


### Hypothesis 1: 

Volatility is the only asset class. A more precise definition would be trading strategies are either long/short volatility/correlation/dispersion. For market-netural strategies, replace the above factors with cross-sectional and the ideas still hold. Similar ideas exist for fixed income market commonly known as convexity. 

Momentum and trend following strategies are long volatility since these strategies benefits when the volatility of the underlying asset increases. On the other hand, Value and mean-reversion based strategies are short volatility as these strategies benefits in a low volatility environment. 


The assumption of dynamic hedging gives the connection between systematic equity trading and option strategies. Therefore quant strategies are either long/short vol at market/sector/industry/... levels. Long vol systems has the characteristic of limited drawdowns while generate large returns in trending market conditions, the portfolio has a positive skew. Short vol systems has the characteristic of a stable income until market condition changes which results in a large drawdown, the portfolio has a negative skew. 


All quant strategies are synthetic assets. Trend Following is a way to create synthetic assets with a negative skew to ones with positive skews. Option strategies is an equivalent way of creating the required pay-off curves. With ideas from delta-hedging, it is possible to get an approximation of the equivalent payoff of the options while dynamically rebalancing the underlying at regular intervals. There is a trade-off between the gain from smaller transaction costs and higher liquidity and the loss for tracking error and market gap risks. 

Here we suggest the use of various option strategies such as covered call, LEAPs, atm calls, otm calls with various tail risk overlays as synthetic assets. In the next post, we will demonstrate how to get a crude approximation of these option-like payoffs without the use of option price data which are not easily available for retail investors. 

Creating these synthetic assets allows a better understanding of our quantitative models. We argue, as trend followers, it is better to build a machine learning/reinforcement learning model to allocate weights to these synthetic assets than directly predicting future returns.  

On the other hand, we can also apply regression on the return of different hedge funds with these synthetic assets to get a breakdown of risk factors we are getting. 


### Hypothesis 2: 

Long volatility/Short volatility strategies required different risk management and data consumption pipelines. Quantitative investing can be considered as a trade off between when to use black-box machine learning and rule-based models in signal generation and portfolio management. A typical stats arb fund would use advanced machine learning methods to generate the pairs-trading signal while use simple volatility based rules to construct the portfolio. For trend following funds it would be to create various synthetic assets using option-derived payoffs and use reinforcement learning to learn dynamic allocation under different market regimes. It is rare that a quantitative hedge fund would apply only black-box machine learning methods in the whole trading system. The trade-off between design of signal generation and portfolio construction is a natural extension of the trade-off between long vol and short vol strategies. Rule-based system provides the robustness required for a trading system while machine learning methods provide the uniqueness(alpha) require to out-perform the market. 



#### Short Vol (Value/Contrarian/Mean Reversion/Carry)

These strategies are inherently short volatility and correlation. Implicit assumption is that there is a inherent model for the fair price of the stock. The current mispricing is temporary and it will return to the fundmental value. The focus is to identify hidden signals or mispricing opprtunites from a wide range of data. Signal generation is more important than risk management. 

Stats arb funds identify various baskets of related assets using correlation and other machine learning techniques. These baskets are the synthetic assets created. 

Examples of strategies 

- Retail: Buy the dip/Buy and hold, High-dividend stocks, Value stocks
- Industry: Fundemental Analysis, Discrentionary Long/Short, Pairs trading (stats arb), Risk parity, Carry in FX and fixed income 

Theory 
- Model: Arbitrage Pricing Theory/ Capital Asset Pricing Model
- Risk management: Modern Portfolio Theory, 
- Metrics: Sharpe Ratio/Sortino Ratio 
    
How they consume data
    
- Price data: Calculate log return and volatility, beta to market index, residual return(alpha), correlation between assets
- Fundamental data: Identify high quality and undervalued stocks
- News data: Identify marco events that can drive the stock price to our target
- Earnings Events: Buy company before earnings annoucement if we estimate it will beat estimates and vice versa
- Estimates: Use peer estiamtes to establish a view on price target 
- Alternative data: Build a better DCF model using real-time sales data etc. 

 

#### Long Vol (Momentum/Trend Following/Active Long Vol)

These strategies are inherently long volatility. The assumption is based on behavioural economics that price actions in market to trend as it attracts new investors. Risk Management and execution is more important than trading signals. They benefit from diversification into different asset classes as it is impossible to predict which market emerge a trend. 

Trend Following funds trade only the most liquid assets as transaction costs and gap risks are the greatest executional risks of trend following strategies. Therefore, it is common for CTA funds to trade futures but not single stocks. 

While it is common for CTAs to take directional trades, trend following strategies can also be in the form of a spread between two assets (cross-sectional momentum) and implied correlation between ETFs and their components. 


Examples of strategies  

- Retail: Turtle trading systems, Moving Average Crossover (MACD)
- Industry: Commodity Trading Advisors (CTA) on time-series momentum, some Long/Short Growth Equity funds on cross-sectional momentum, Long Vol Hedge Funds such as Universa and Artemis Capital Management


Theory 
- Model: Stochastic volatility models 
- Risk Management: Bet size, Kelly Formula,
- Metrics: Calmar ratio, Downside volatility
 

How they consume data
       
- Price data: Create synthetic assets with different payoff profiles, technical analysis to identify potential trends
- Fundamental data: Screen for growth companies
- News data: Confirm price trends and identify potential turning points 
- Earnings Events: Use earnings events to identify potential turning points and trigger for gap up/down 
- Option data: Create implied volatility surface and volatility skew


#### Hypothesis 3 

The (legendary dragon) investor Christopher Cole recommended a balanced exposure to different long volatility and short volatility strategies in your portfolio. 

Two of the components, namely (Commoditites) Trend Following and Active Long Volatility are not easily accessible by retail (Details in appendix 1). The current lack of good alternatives ETFs limits retail access to proven strategies that can supplement existing index ETFs during change of market regime. 

To construct a balanced portfolio with long volatiltiy and short volatility strategies, one can choose ready made portfolio such as index ETFs to get exposure to various smart-beta factors at a really low cost or invest/build a specialised strategies used by Asset Management/Hedge Funds which comes at a higher cost. 

We argue there is no additional benefits in employing active management strategies for both long vol and short since the alpha signals tend to cancel out. Most stats arb fund will actively manage their short vol strategies while paying for tail risk hedges (through the use of VIX options) to manage the risk in their portfolio. For retail investors, we recommend the opposite, which is employ passive investing strategies for short vol strategies (Value ETFs/Funds) while actively managing long vol strategies (Trend Following strategies). 

For retail given the difficult to access to data, it is better to buy market-cap based or value stock index to gain exposure to the short vol strategies while implement trend following and active long volatility strategies as overlay to existing equity holdings through the use of LEAP option-like rebalancing strategies. For retail investors, it is undesirable to hold options directly due to high transaction costs and bid-ask spread, also (for UK investors) ISA accounts do not allow holding of derivatives. 

In other words, for retail investors, Buy-and-hold equity with tail risk hedges = LEAP option-like rebalancing strategies by combining the delta exposure of different strategies. This ensures the overall delta is mostly positive for most market conditions and only goes negative in a long recession such as Japan in the 1980s. 

In the next few posts, we will explore how various long volatility ideas and their overlays can implemented for retail investors. 


## Appendix 1 Implementation details quoted from Christopher Cole's dragon portfolio paper[1]

### Active Long volatility 

- When 63_day return > 5%, get exposure to S&P 500 2.5% Monthly Rolling Call Index
- When 63_day return < -5%, get exposure to S&P 500 2.5% Monthly Rolling Put Index

S&P 500 2.5% Monthly Rolling Call Index is a strategy to buy monthly 2.5% out of the money (25 delta) Call Option sized to portfolio and roll before expiration.

### Trend Following

- When price > 50_day average, go long on the commodity future basket
- When price < 50_day average, go short on the commodity future basket
   
[1] https://www.artemiscm.com/artemis-dragon        
