---
layout: post
title: Volatility-based strategies for retail Part 1B 
---



# Introduction 


We will give a brief overview of quantitative strategies employed by different funds as an extension of previous post. 


For a more detailed reading, please refer to following books 
- Statistical Consequences of Fat Tails: Real World Preasymptotics, Epistemology, and Applications (Technical Incerto Vol. 1). Nassim Nicholas Taleb 
- Algorithmic Trading: Winning Strategies and Their Rationale. Ernest P. Chan 
- The Second Leg Down: Strategies for Profiting After a Market Sell-Off. Hari P. Krishnan 

# How to outperform the market 

The foundation of fundamental/quantitative trading strategies are based on the invalidity of Efficient-market hypothesis, which means it is possible to outperform the market consistently. This is why hedge funds can charge 2 and 20 on their clients. There are many evidence that fund managers (Warren Buffet, George Soros, Ray Dalio) can outperform the market. 


We provide examples of various quantiative trading strategies using famous examples in financial history. 

## Stats arbitrage and Value investing 

In the previous post we stated both stats arbirtrage and value investing are short vol strategies since both (relative) buy the asset when it is on decline relying on the assumption that the asset is underpriced/mispriced and will revert to the mean. The major differences between both are the time-horizon and trade position 

Stats arbitrage has a shorter holding time (minutes to days) and most trades are expressed as relative value. The number of trades made are much larger than fundamental-based (value) funds. The core philosophy is that consistent profit can be made by applying weak signals (slightly >50% accuracy) on a large number of securities. 

Value-investing has a longer holding time (days to months) and it can be both long-only and long/short, though most value-funds will be long-bias (such as 130/30 funds). Value-funds has a higher portfolio concentration than quantitative funds due to the human-aspects of stock-picking. The core philosophy is that fund managers can use their expertise to pick under-priced stocks by rigorous study of financial statements and industry trends. 

While we have seen fewer quantaitive hedge funds marketing themselves as stats arb funds (the term is going out-of-fashion), if in the publicity materials we have seen words like "predictions", "machine learning" then we will assume they employ an (overall) short vol/correlation strategies for reasons explained below. 

### Limitations

#### Changing market conditions 

The overall market conditions (micro-structure and participants) has changed significantly since 1980s, where the first stats arb funds are launched. Change in minimum tick size has made mean-reversion strategies less profitable since the 2000s [1]. The rise of passive investing (Index ETFs) also made the market more flow-driven.  

#### Armament race for alpha

Easier access to data for both professtional and individual players has to lead to more efficient market which means fewer alpha opprtunities. This poses a limit on the capacity of strategy and fund size. Examples: Ren Tech's best performing fund (Medallion Fund) has been closed to outside investors since 1993. Warren Buffet's Berkshire has performance since 2000s is much worse than that of during 1970-1980s. One explanation for that is Warren Buffett's early strategy involves buying assets at distressed prices which is not scalable [2]. The rise of HFT also make mispricing to last shorter. In the race for alpha, funds have to spend more and more money on infrastructure (to compete with HFTs) and data (trying to find new alphas from alternative data). 

#### Complexity of strategies 

As the hunt of alpha gets more difficult, strategies grow in complexity with a wider application of black-box methods. It is increasing difficult for portfolio managers and risk management to understand why the model will make a trade decision. A typical hedge fund will run multiple quantitative strategies so it becomes impossible to model the impact and significance of these ML-based signals. These highly non-linear systems  are at an unstable equilibrium which makes them highly suspectable to small changes to input conditions. A consequence is that we will see more flash crash in the absence of relevant marco news as the breakdown of one automated trading system will trigger a chain reaction for others. 

#### Abuse of alternative data and machine learning 

The use of alternative data such as news articles and sentiment based on online forums will result in some invetible look-ahead bias for the following reasons.

- No systematic collection of alternative data until recently. The timestamp of historical news articles can only be estimated. Machine-readable news is only available from Bloomberg and other big data providers, and could contain errors [3]. 
- Recency-bias. As above most sentiment strategies are built only based on a short-period of backtesting since 2015, where we have never seen a significant bear market lasting longer than a month. 
- Look-ahead technology. Strategies using methods that do not exist or becomes popular until recently. Examples include transformers in NLP (2019). Many deep learning methods in NLP and image processing would required a pre-trained general purpose model and data before applying to speciic applications. 

In general, most machine learning models used in indsutrial engineering are not equipped to model non-stationary data. Neural networks cannot extrapolate to unseen data. Over-fitting in neural networks are very common. 


#### Black Swan risk

All short-vol strategies will suffer black swan risks. This applies especially for quantiative hedge funds which employs a significant amount of leverage. Market-neutral strategies often employs significant leverage as the mispricing between assets are often very insignificant. This exposes the strategy to black-swan risks, where correlation between assets breaksdown. As funds continue to find new alpha, they divest into alternative and illiquid assets. Combining both we get the perfect textbook example of blow-up when you have a leverage position on illiquid Russian bonds in 1998. 
We would argue some part of alpha generated by mean-reversion strategies is due to liquidity risk, which are not accounted in traditional factor models (due to the fact liquidity is assumed to be perfect in Black-Scholes and Modern Portfolio Theory). 

Regarding liquidity risk, we also comment the trend of pension managers chasing alternative investments such as Venture Capital or Private Equity to achieve greater returns in the current low-yield environment poses a significant risk. We hypothesis the illusion of alpha of these investments are due to accounting methods, unlike traded securities where the market price is used to model the risk and return of assets, PE and VC investments are often relies on internal data for valuation which does not hold during distressed situation. In other words, PE and VC are simply leveraged beta and liquidity risk which gives the apparaent outperformance of the market. 


## Trend Following and Volatility Funds

We provide a non exhuasive list of Long volatility strategies below. These strategies are employed by commodity trading advisor (CTA) and (Long) Volatility funds with different variants. 

- Time-Series momentum (Trend Following) 
- Cross-sectional/Relative momentum 
- Relative volatility 
- Implied correlation/dispersion

Time-series momentum aims to capture to the autocorrelation of price movements, which suggests upward(downward) price movements tends to follow by movements in the same direction. Cross-sectional momentum achieves the similar results while keeping market/sector neutral, for example, buying the top 5 tech stocks in the US measured by trailing 1-year Sharpe ratio while shorting the corresponding bottom 5 stocks with worst Sharpe ratio. Both strategies can generate uncorrelated returns to traditional buy-and-hold strategies on stocks and bonds.

Relative volatility is a strategy which aims to capture difference between realised and implied volatility. It can be expressed as a call-spread/put-spread on the same asset, buying and selling volatilities of related assets. A closely related concept is implied correlation trade which aims to take profit from the change of correlation between index and its components. A Long dispersion trade can be expressed as selling ATM straddle on index while buying ATM straddle on the component stocks, this trade makes money when correlation between stocks decrease. The opposite of this trade, short dispersion can be considered as a form of crisis alpha since correlation of stocks tends to 1 during market distress. 


CTA funds will employ a wide range of systematic strategies to capture different alternative risk premia in such as momentum, flows and carry [4].  
The success of CTA strategies relies on trading highly liquid assets (Futures/ETFs) with rigorous risk management to limit gap risk and significant drawdowns. Even the core of many CTA strategies are well-known, a professional CTA fund can bring various benefits to the investors

- Diversification of Market: CTA funds can trade a wide of liquid Futures in global market (commodities/currencies/equities/interest rates) which is impossible for an individual investor. 
- Diversification of Strategy: Economy of scale enables running of strategies at different horizons and parameters to capture various market trends.
- Professional Execution: Dedicated expertise and infrastructure in making sure the trades are excuted at the right time, which is crucial for the success of low latency trend following strategies. 
- Expertise: CTA funds has in-house knowledge gained from running strategies under different market conditions

While no CTA funds will employ solely long volatility strategies (Carry is a massive short vol strategy), we classify CTA on the whole as long vol for the fact they provide uncorrelated returns and crisis alpha for investors. 

We would like to stress the difference between tail risk funds and CTAs. Tail risk fund aims to hedge left tail risks (deflation) at a negative carry cost. CTAs are directional unbiased which aims to capture both upward and downward trends. 


### Success and Limitations 


#### Crisis Alpha 

CTA are able to outperform in unusual market conditions such as stagflation in the 1970s, dot-com-bubble in the 2000s, great financial crisis of 2008 where traditional strategies fail. This form of crisis alpha is valuable for investors since it helps to reduce drawdown of their overall portfolio thus preserving long-term growth of their capital. 


#### Underperformance since 2010 

It is undeniable that CTA funds are under-performing since GFC. We suggest intervention from central banks which creates mean-reversion behaviour which is unfavourable to traditional trend following strategies. Another reason is that as CTA strategies becomes more popular after GFC, over-crowding between strategies diminish return for investors. 


## Possible events that will change market structure 

Here we list serveral significant events that the author believes that will bring material changes to the market in the next decade. We focus on non-marco related events in this list. We believe these changes will create a more favourable market condition for trend following strategies. 

### 24/7 trading 

The popularity of crypto trading suggests there is a demand of 24/7 trading. By reducing gap risk, it allows trend following strategies to diversify into individual stocks. New seasonal and order flow patterns will also create trading opportunities for CTA funds. 

### Make-you-own ETF 

Growing concerns of retail investors on ESG will lead to a demand to investing in most of the stocks in the market index excluding an ESG blacklist, which is different based on personal perference. As the new generation of investors want more personalised experience, we expect a new form of robo-investing which allows retail investors to create their own ETFs to get low-cost exposure to various smart-beta exposures to emerge in the next few years. This will create new trends in market (most retail actions are trend-driven) and changes the composition of the current flow of passive investing (more advantage for CTA and momentum funds who has infrastructure to analyse order flows). 


# References 

[1] Algorithmic Trading: Winning Strategies and Their Rationale. Ernest P. Chan  
[2] https://twitter.com/goodalexander/status/1311799486637719552    
[3] https://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/09/business/09air.html     
[4] https://www.aspectcapital.com/insight/anotheraspect-what-was-trendy-2020/      



