---
layout: post
title: UK Nasdaq
---

The UK market index, FTSE 100 has underperformed its US peers S&P 500 over the last 20 years. While most would attribute the under-performance of UK market due to Brexit, my hypothesis is that the under-performance is due to the index construction methodology. Market-cap based index ignores the concentration of sector weightings in the index. In the UK market, many big caps belongs to cyclical sectors such as Financials, Energy and Basic Materials, therefore these stocks formed a major part of FTSE 100 and FTSE 250. In the US market, we have the tech giants which experiences large growth since the financial crisis and now over 40% of stocks in the S&P 500 are now in the Technology and Telecommunications sector. 



| Data as of 2021 May     | FTSE 100 | S&P 500 |
|-------------------------|----------|---------|
| Energy                  | 8.7%     | 2.8%    |
| Basic Materials         | 11.5%    | 2.8%    |
| Financials              | 19.3%    | 11.9%   |
| Real Estate             | 1.5%     | 2.6%    |
| Consumer Discretionary  | 11.1%    | 12.1%   |
| Industrials             | 12.0%    | 8.9%    |
| Telecommunications      | 2.6%     | 11.1%   |
| Technology              | 1.4%     | 26.2%   |
| Health Care             | 10.1%    | 13.0%   |
| Utilities               | 3.3%     | 2.6%    |
| Consumer Staples        | 18.5%    | 6.0%    |


FTSE techMARK 100 is currently the best approximation of Nasdaq Index in the UK but it covers Information Technology stocks only, missing out e-commerce stocks such as Deliveroo. However this index has a much lower popularity than the FTSE 100, FTSE 250 index and not many retail investors know its existence. Currenly (2021 July), there is no actively traded ETF products keeping of the above index. 


As FTSE 100 contains many stocks such as Royal Dutch Shell Plc which are not good for the environment, investors are now looking for a better alternative which avoids Energy and Materials companies that often damage the environment and community in developing countries. We believe there is a demand for an ETF that keep tracks of technology and innovative companies in the UK and EU with fees comparable to existing tracker funds of FTSE 100, FTSE 250 and STOXX 600. 

There are many thematic ETFs that focus on automation, aging population but these ETFs suffers from various problems of higher fees, lack of liquidity and transparency in company selection process. Sometimes these funds has an over-concentration in a single subindustry which makes them not suitable to replace the existing index funds for long term investment. 


Here, we present UK Innovation Index, a systematic way to capture innovation and growth in the UK market. Our design principles are as follows 

  - Rule-based: Unlike actively managed ETFs such as ARKK by ARK investment, we do not aim to pick the winners. The stocks are selected based on a transparent rule that can be easily implemented, thus lowering the fees of the tracking ETFs. . 
  - Broad market exposure: There are sector/industry based ETFs in the US but investors need to combine serveral of them to get the diversification purposes. Our index aims to have a wide enough coverage so that retail can replace FTSE All Shares with this ETF. 

The index construction rules are as follows 

- The stock is listed in the UK Market (LSE/AIM) at least 1 year (so that we can estiamte 1 year volatility)
- The stock is actively traded, which has an average daily dollar volume greater than 1M in the last year.
- The stock belongs to one of the innovative industries:             
  Internet & Direct Marketing Retail, Health Care Technology, Biotechnology, Pharmaceuticals, Life Sciences Tools & Services, IT Services, Software, Communications Equipment, "Technology Hardware, Storage & Peripherals", "Electronic Equipment, Instruments & Components", Semiconductors & Semiconductor Equipment, Diversified Telecommunication Services, Wireless Telecommunication Services, Interactive Media & Services

The above index construction rule can be improved as applying the rule on US market would miss out Tesla, a leading electric car company which included in Nasdaq and most growth ETFs. Different systematic rules are needed to select Tesla from other Automobile companies. 
 

In the next post I will post how does different weighting schemes change the performance of index. We will demonstrate by removing cyclical stocks (Financials/Real Estate/Basic Materials/Energy), the performance of buy and hold strategy in the UK market can be improved. 

Further work to do: 

Develop a systematic screen of stocks in the LSE and AIM market to re-create historical index without survivor bias. 

Investigate the interaction between smart-beta factors (Buy-and-hold/Mean Reversion/Momentum) with sectors in the UK and US market. Our hypothesis is that by re-weighting stocks in different sectors with overlay of different timing styles, it can out-perform a traditional cap-based ETF which over-concentrates into a few big companies. 


