---
layout: post
title: Poker Variant with card drafting  
---

In the following I present a cooperative game theory problem which combines classic poker game with card drafting. 

Background:  

Card Drafting [1,2] is a very common element in games. Most card drafting games that people play often le often contain complex elements that makes mathematical modelling difficult and clumsy. In the following, we propose a new poker variant with card drafting which can demonstrate various interesting properties of the game mechanics, such as interaction between players under imperfect information,  

 

Rules:  

There will be 4 players in the game, which uses a standard deck of cards (52 cards).  

Each player will start with N cards from hand, where $5 \leq N \leq 13$.  

Each game consists of 5 rounds. In each round, each player will pick a card from their hand and put that in front of them. After revealing the cards picked at the same time, each player will then pass the remaining cards to the adjacent player clockwise(anti-clockwise). After passing the cards the next rounds begins.  

After 5 rounds each player will have 5 cards in front of them, the winner is determined by standard poker rules.   

A non-cooperative scoring system would assign 1 to the winner and 0 to all other players.  

A cooperative scoring system would assign a score of the inverse of poker probabilities of a 5-card hand [3] for each player with suitable capped payoffs. 

 

Example:  

Consider the case starting with 7 cards in hand (N=7)  

In the first round, player A,B,C,D picked a card from their hand. Each player can pick a card out of 7 cards. After that, player A passed on the 6 remaining cards to player B etc  

In the second round, player A,B,C,D picked a card from their hand. Each player can pick a card out of 6 cards. After that, player A passed on the 5 remaining cards to player B etc 

The above process repeats until each player has picked 5 cards.  

 

[1] [2105.11864] Predicting Human Card Selection in Magic: The Gathering with Contextual Preference Ranking (arxiv.org)  

[2] [2009.00655] AI solutions for drafting in Magic: the Gathering (arxiv.org) 

[3] Poker probability - Wikipedia

